source/VexiiRiscv/Fetch/index.rst, before:


Fetch
=====

A few plugins operate in the fetch stage :

- FetchPipelinePlugin
- PcPlugin
- FetchCachelessPlugin
- FetchL1Plugin
- BtbPlugin
- GSharePlugin
- HistoryPlugin



FetchPipelinePlugin
-------------------

Provide the pipeline framework for all the fetch related hardware. It use the native spinal.lib.misc.pipeline API without any restriction.

PcPlugin
--------

Will :

- implement the fetch program counter register
- inject the program counter in the first fetch stage
- allow other plugin to create "jump" interface allowing to override the PC value

Jump interfaces will impact the PC value injected in the fetch stage in a combinatorial manner to reduce latency.

FetchCachelessPlugin
--------------------

Will :

- Generate a fetch memory bus
- Connect that memory bus to the fetch pipeline with a response buffer
- Allow out of order memory bus responses (for maximal compatibility)
- Always generate aligned memory accesses


FetchL1Plugin
-------------

Will :

- Implement a L1 fetch cache (non-blocking)
- Generate a fetch memory bus for the SoC interconnect
- Check for the presence of a fetch.PrefetcherPlugin to bind it to the L1


PrefetcherNextLinePlugin
------------------------

Currently, there is one instruction L1 prefetcher implementation (PrefetchNextLinePlugin).

It is a very simple implementation :

- On L1 access miss, it trigger the prefetching of the next cache line
- On L1 access hit, if the cache line accessed is the same than the last prefetch, is trigger the prefetching of the next cache line

In short it can only prefetch one cache block ahead and assume that if there was a cache miss on a block,
then the following blocks are likely worth prefetching as well.

.. image:: /asset/picture/fetch_prefetch_nl.png

Note, for the best results, the FetchL1Plugin need to have
2 hardware refill slots instead of 1 (default).

The prefetcher can be turned off by setting the CSR 0x7FF bit 0.


BtbPlugin
---------

See more in the Branch prediction chapter

GSharePlugin
------------

See more in the Branch prediction chapter

HistoryPlugin
-------------

Will :

- implement the branch history register
- inject the branch history in the first fetch stage
- allow other plugin to create interface to override the branch history value (on branch prediction / execution)

branch history interfaces will impact the branch history value injected in the fetch stage in a combinatorial manner to reduce latency.

Commit message:

Add more doc (fetch / perf)

source/VexiiRiscv/Fetch/index.rst, after:


Fetch
=====

The goal of the fetch pipeline is to provide the CPU with a stream of words in which the instructions to execute are presents.
So more precisely, the fetch pipeline doesn't realy have the notion of instruction, but instead, just provide memory aligned chunks of memory block (ex 64 bits).
Those chunks of memory (word) will later be handled by the "AlignerPlugin" to extract the instruction to be executed (and also handle the decompression in the case of RVC).

Here is an example of fetch architecture with an instruction cache, branch predictor aswell as a prefetcher.

.. image:: /asset/picture/fetch_l1.png



A few plugins operate in the fetch stage :

- FetchPipelinePlugin
- PcPlugin
- FetchCachelessPlugin
- FetchL1Plugin
- BtbPlugin
- GSharePlugin
- HistoryPlugin



FetchPipelinePlugin
-------------------

Provide the pipeline framework for all the fetch related hardware. It use the native spinal.lib.misc.pipeline API without any restriction.

PcPlugin
--------

Will :

- implement the fetch program counter register
- inject the program counter in the first fetch stage
- allow other plugin to create "jump" interface allowing to override the PC value

Jump interfaces will impact the PC value injected in the fetch stage in a combinatorial manner to reduce latency.

FetchCachelessPlugin
--------------------

Will :

- Generate a fetch memory bus
- Connect that memory bus to the fetch pipeline with a response buffer
- Allow out of order memory bus responses (for maximal compatibility)
- Always generate aligned memory accesses

Note that in order to get goo performance on FPGA, you may want to set it with the following config in order to relax timings :

- forkAt = 1
- joinAt = 2



FetchL1Plugin
-------------

Will :

- Implement a L1 fetch cache (non-blocking)
- Generate a fetch memory bus for the SoC interconnect
- Check for the presence of a fetch.PrefetcherPlugin to bind it to the L1


PrefetcherNextLinePlugin
------------------------

Currently, there is one instruction L1 prefetcher implementation (PrefetchNextLinePlugin).

It is a very simple implementation :

- On L1 access miss, it trigger the prefetching of the next cache line
- On L1 access hit, if the cache line accessed is the same than the last prefetch, is trigger the prefetching of the next cache line

In short it can only prefetch one cache block ahead and assume that if there was a cache miss on a block,
then the following blocks are likely worth prefetching as well.

.. image:: /asset/picture/fetch_prefetch_nl.png

Note, for the best results, the FetchL1Plugin need to have
2 hardware refill slots instead of 1 (default).

The prefetcher can be turned off by setting the CSR 0x7FF bit 0.


BtbPlugin
---------

This plugin implement most of the branch prediction logic. 
See more in the Branch prediction chapter

GSharePlugin
------------

See more in the Branch prediction chapter

HistoryPlugin
-------------

Will :

- implement the branch history register
- inject the branch history in the first fetch stage
- allow other plugin to create interface to override the branch history value (on branch prediction / execution)

branch history interfaces will impact the branch history value injected in the fetch stage in a combinatorial manner to reduce latency.
