source/VexiiRiscv/BranchPrediction/index.rst, before:

Branch Prediction
=================

The branch prediction is implemented as follow :

- During fetch, a BTB, GShare, RAS memory is used to provide an early branch prediction (BtbPlugin / GSharePlugin)
- In Decode, the DecodePredictionPlugin will ensure that no "none jump/branch instruction"" predicted as a jump/branch continues down the pipeline.
- In Execute, the prediction made is checked and eventually corrected. Also a stream of data is generated to feed the BTB / GShare memories with good data to learn.

Here is a diagram of the whole architecture :

.. image:: /asset/picture/branch_prediction.png

While it would have been possible in the decode stage to correct some miss prediction from the BTB / RAS, it isn't done to improve timings and reduce Area.

BtbPlugin
---------

Will :

- Implement a branch target buffer in the fetch pipeline
- Implement a return address stack buffer
- Predict which slices of the fetched word are the last slice of a branch/jump
- Predict the branch/jump target
- Use the FetchConditionalPrediction plugin (GSharePlugin) to  know if branch should be taken
- Apply the prediction (flush + pc update + history update)
- Learn using the LearnPlugin interface. Only learn on misprediction. To avoid write to read hazard, the fetch stage is blocked when it learn.
- Implement "ways" named chunks which are statically assigned to groups of word's slices, allowing to predict multiple branch/jump present in the same word

GSharePlugin
------------

Will :

- Implement a FetchConditionalPrediction (GShare flavor)
- Learn using the LearnPlugin interface. Write to read hazard are handled via a bypass
- Will not apply the prediction via flush / pc change, another plugin will do that

DecodePredictionPlugin
----------------------

The purpose of this plugin is to ensure that no branch/jump prediction was made for non branch/jump instructions.
In case this is detected, the plugin will just flush the pipeline and set the fetch PC to redo everything, but this time with a "first prediction skip"

BranchPlugin
------------

Placed in the execute pipeline, it will ensure that the branch prediction was correct, else it correct it. It also generate a learn interface.

LearnPlugin
-----------

This plugin will collect all the learn interface (generated by the BranchPlugin) and produce a single stream of learn interface for the BtbPlugin / GShare plugin to use.

Commit message:

more doc about branch prediction and fetch stages

source/VexiiRiscv/BranchPrediction/index.rst, after:

Branch Prediction
=================

The branch prediction is implemented as follow :

- During fetch, a BTB, GShare, RAS memory is used to provide an early branch prediction (BtbPlugin / GSharePlugin)
- In Decode, the DecodePredictionPlugin will ensure that no "none jump/branch instruction"" predicted as a jump/branch continues down the pipeline.
- In Execute, the prediction made is checked and eventually corrected. Also a stream of data is generated to feed the BTB / GShare memories with good data to learn.

Here is a diagram of the whole architecture :

.. image:: /asset/picture/branch_prediction.png

While it would have been possible in the decode stage to correct some miss prediction from the BTB / RAS, it isn't done to improve timings and reduce Area.

BtbPlugin
---------

Will :

- Implement a branch target buffer in the fetch pipeline
- Implement a return address stack buffer
- Predict which slices of the fetched word are the last slice of a branch/jump
- Predict the branch/jump target
- Predict if the given instruction is a branch, a jump or something else
- Predict if the given instruction should push or pop the RAS (Return Address Stack)
- Use the FetchConditionalPrediction plugin (GSharePlugin) to  know if branch should be taken
- Apply the prediction (flush + pc update + history update)
- Learn using the LearnPlugin interface. Only learn on misprediction. To avoid write to read hazard, the fetch stage is blocked when it learn.
- Implement "ways" named chunks which are statically assigned to groups of word's slices, allowing to predict multiple branch/jump present in the same word


.. image:: /asset/picture/btb.png

Note that it may help to not make the BTB learn when there has been a non-taken branch.

- The BTB don't need to predict non-taken branch
- Keep the BTB entry for something more usefull
- For configs in which multiple instruction can reside in a single fetch word (ex dual issue with RVC), 
  multiple branch/jump instruction can reside in a single fetch word => need for compromises, 
  and hope that some of the branch/jump in the chunk are rarely taken.

GSharePlugin
------------

Will :

- Implement a FetchConditionalPrediction (GShare flavor)
- Learn using the LearnPlugin interface. Write to read hazard are handled via a bypass
- Will not apply the prediction via flush / pc change, another plugin will do that (ex : BtbPlugin)

Note that one of the current issue with GShare, is that it take quite a few iterations to learn (depending the branch history)

DecodePredictionPlugin
----------------------

The purpose of this plugin is to ensure that no branch/jump prediction was made for non branch/jump instructions.
In case this is detected, the plugin will : 

- schedule a "REDO trap" which will flush everything and make the CPU jump to the failed instruction
- Make the predictor skip the first incoming prediction
- Make the predictor unlearn the prediction entry which failed

BranchPlugin
------------

Placed in the execute pipeline, it will ensure that the branch predictions were correct, else it correct them. It also generate a learn interface to feed the LearnPlugin.

LearnPlugin
-----------

This plugin will collect all the learn interface (generated by the BranchPlugin) and produce a single stream of learn interface for the BtbPlugin / GShare plugin to use.
